.\" $Id: turnin.man,v 4.10 1996/07/14 18:49:25 kb207252 Exp $
.\"
.TH TURNIN 5L
.UC 4

.SH NAME
turnin \- instructions for instructors who use
.IR turnin ( 1L )
and
.IR project ( 1L )
.br

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.IR Turnin ( 1L )
is a program provided by Purdue University Computing Center to
aid instructors in the collecting of assignments from students.
To use
.IR turnin ,
the instructor must run the command
.sp 1
	project -i
.sp 1
which will interactively prompt the instructor for more information about
the course in question.
The superuser will be notified that the instructor wishes to use
turnin and will add the user's login name to a configuration file.
.PP
The Computing Center may also build a .login (.profile) in each of
your students accounts to create a initial csh (sh) environment.
In this .login (.profile), there will be an environment variable
called \*(lqSUB_\fIcourse\fP\*(rq, where \fIcourse\fP is the course that
the student is enrolled in.
This environment variable is set to the student's division or section
to allow for large courses to be managed effectively.
For example the command:
.sp 1
	setenv SUB_cs300 morning
.sp 1
might be used to put a given user's files into the `morning' section
for cs300 (this command would be in the user's generated .login).
.PP
The project command maintains a directory hierarchy in the course
administrator's account which \fIturnin\fP(1L) will modify to 
submit files for a login.
This directory tree is rooted at the name given to the project command
when it was run with the -i option and must be world readable.
The default name for the root of this tree is `submit'.
.PP
Here is a sample directory layout:
.sp 1
.ta 0.7i 1.4i 2.1i 2.8i 3.5i 4.2i 4.9i 5.6i
	$ cd
.br
	$ ls -aF submit
.br
	\&./	\&../	\&.lock	Projlist	1/	2/
.br
	$ ls -aF submit/1
.br
	\&./	\&../	morning/	afternoon/
.br
	$ ls -aF submit/1/morning
.br
	\&./	\&../	dsg	ksb	mjb	mjs
.br
	$ exit
.sp 1
.PP
At the top level there are 3 types of entries:  a lock file (`.lock')
which is \fIflock\fP(2)'d when project is running, a database file
(`Projlist') which contains the status information on the current
projects, and a directory for each active project.
.PP
Each active project directory contains a subdirectory for each division or
section of the course.
Each of these, in turn, contains one \fItar\fP(1) file for each login
name that has submitted files for this project.

.SH BUGS
A student may change sections (or divisions) by changing an environment
variable.
This generally leads to a grader not getting a submission from the student.

.SH AUTHOR
Kevin S Braunsdorf, FedEx (ksb@fedex.com)

.SH "SEE ALSO"
project(1L), turnin(1L), tar(1), turnin.cf(5L)
