.\" $Id: hashd.man,v 1.1 1999/07/31 21:38:04 ksb Exp $
.\" by Kevin Braunsdorf
.TH HASHD 1L LOCAL
.SH NAME
hashd \- provide network unique identifiers for Web single sign-on
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ds PN "hashd
\fI\*(PN\fP [\-\fBi\fP] [\-\fBb\fP \fIstart:bits\fP] \fIcounter\fP
.br
\fI\*(PN\fP \-\fBh\fP
.br
\fI\*(PN\fP \-\fBV\fP
.br

.sp
.SH DESCRIPTION
The fd positional parameter \fIcounter\fP is
a file that holds the counter value (in binary).

.SH OPTIONS
If the program is called as \fIhashd\fP then no options are forced.
.TP
\fB\-b\fP \fIstart:bits\fP
Force bits at this position in the output.
This option may only be given once.  Based on the present mapping
from the seed to the hash bits 49 to 40 would be the best place to
for bits into the hash.
.TP
\fB\-h\fP
Print a help message.
.TP
\fB\-i\fP
Remove the network return code from the output.  This allows the
hashd to be called directly on the local machine, but it doesn't
for the -b option to be the same as the local configuration.
.TP
\fB\-V\fP
Show version information.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
\fIhashd\fP \-b 49:000 /var/run/sequence
Distribure unique hashes from \fI/var/run/sequence\fP but force
bits 49,48,47 (out of 60..1) to be zero all the time. On another
host in the network we would run with \-b 49:001 (an so on).
This will prevent these hosts from providing the same hash values.
.TP
\fIhashd\fP -i /var/run/local.seq
Use a local sequence file and just write the hash on \fBstdout\fP.

.SH FILES
.PP
The option `-b' has a mkcmd built routine to read data from the function
parameter \fIstart:bits\fP.
These columns are converted from this input:
.\" hunk 1
.TP
.CR iStart :
start of forced bits
.TP
.CR pcBits \en
list of bits to force
.SH BUGS
The \-b option shold force the incement routing to skip the
force bits in the increment.  It will before we roll 30 bits worth.
.SH AUTHOR
Kevin Braunsdorf
.br
FedEx UNIX Support
.br
ksbsa.fedex.com
.SH "SEE ALSO"
sh(1), nethash(1L)
