.\" $Id: console.man,v 8.1 1998/06/07 16:04:07 root Exp $
.TH CONSOLE 8L "Local"
.SH NAME
console \- console server client program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ds PN "console
\fI\*(PN\fP [\-\fBa\fP|\fBA\fP | \-\fBf\fP|\fBF\fP | \-\fBs\fP|\fBS\fP] [\-\fBr\fP\fBv\fP] [\-\fBe\fP \fIattn\fP] [\-\fBM\fP \fImaster\fP] \fImachine\fP
.br
\fI\*(PN\fP \-\fBu\fP|\fBU\fP|\fBw\fP|\fBW\fP|\fBx\fP|\fBX\fP [\-\fBv\fP] [\-\fBM\fP \fImaster\fP]
.br
\fI\*(PN\fP \-\fBq\fP|\fBQ\fP [\-\fBv\fP] [\-\fBM\fP \fImaster\fP]
.br
\fI\*(PN\fP \-\fBd\fP|\fBD\fP|\fBp\fP|\fBP\fP [\-\fBv\fP] [\-\fBM\fP \fImaster\fP]
.br
\fI\*(PN\fP \-\fBh\fP
.br
\fI\*(PN\fP \-\fBV\fP
.br

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B Console
is used to manipulate console terminals remotely or poll running
\fIconserver\fP(8L) daemons for status information.
.PP
.B Console
queries the user for an access password before
granting interactive access to a console (on a non-trusted system)
since such a session may provide single-user access.
This password may be the superuser's password or a password installed
for a limitted number of devices.
.PP
Any default (\fB\-a\fP) connection is dropped to spy mode if
someone else is attached read-write.
Force this spy mode connection to read write with the ``f'' command
below.
.PP
In the non-interactive mode
.B console
exits after it outputs the requested information.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-a
Access a console with a two-way connection (this is the default).
The uppercase varient (\-\fBA\fP) of this option forces a replay command into
the negotiated connection after it is established.
.TP
.B \-d
Display daemon versions.  The \fIconsole\fP client connects to each
server to request its version information.
The uppercase varient (\-\fBD\fP) of this option only requests
only the primary server's version.
.TP
.BI \-e esc
Set the initial two character escape sequence to
those represented by \fIesc\fP.
Any of the forms output by \fIcat\fP(1)'s \-\fBv\fP option
are accepted.  The default value is ``^Ec'' (control-e lowercase-c)
read as ``escape conserver''.
.TP
.B \-f
Same as
.I \-a
except it will force any existing read/write connection into spy mode.
Uppercase (viz. \-\fBF\fP) forces a replay command.
.TP
.B \-h
Display a brief help message.
.TP
.BI \-M master
The \fIconsole\fP client program polls \fImaster\fP as the primary server,
rather than the hard coded default (``console.itsd.fedex.com'').
.TP
.B \-p
The \fIconsole\fP client program polls all each peer console servers
for their process id.
The uppercase varient (\-\fBP\fP) of this option only polls the \fImaster\fP
console server.
.TP
.B \-q
The \fIconsole\fP client requests the server daemon quit (shutdown).
A password is sent in the protocol stream, if none is required for
the local host to shutdown the server just press return.
The uppercase varient (\-\fBQ\fP) of this option just acts on
the \fImaster\fP server.
.TP
.B \-r
Request a raw connection to the group control virtual console,
this is only useful for learning the protocol used by the
non-interactive sequences.
If you think this is something you might want to try you need to
get out a little more.
.TP
.B \-s
Requests a read-only (spy mode) connection.
If this mode all the escape sequences (below) work, or report errors,
but all other keyboard input is discarded.
Uppercase (viz. \-\fBS\fP) still forces a replay command.
.TP
.B \-u
The \fIconsole\fP client program polls each console group for a list
of connected users.
Uppercase (viz. \-\fBU\fP) limits the scan to groups of the
\fImaster\fP server.
.TP
.B \-V
Output the version of the console client program.
.TP
.B \-v
Be more verbose during when building the connection(s).
Use this option in combination with any of `show' options (below)
for added benefit.
.TP
.B \-w
Show a list of all connections to all consoles.
Uppercase (viz. \-\fBW\fP) limits the scan to groups of the
\fImaster\fP server.
.TP
.B \-x
Show a list of consoles and devices.
Uppercase (viz. \-\fBX\fP) limits the scan to groups of the
\fImaster\fP server.

.SH "ESCAPE SEQUENCES"
The connection can be controlled by a two character escape sequence, followed
by a command.
The default escape sequence is ``control-E c''
(octal 005 143).
Commands are:
.sp
.TS
c l.
a	switch to attach mode
c	toggle flow control (don't do this)
d	down the current console
e	change the escape sequence to the next two characters
f	force a switch to attach mode
l1	send a 3 second serial line break (might halt a Sun)
o	reopen the line to clear errors (silo overflows)
r	replay the last 20 lines of output
s	switch to spy mode
u	show other users on this port
v	show the version of the group server
w	who is using this console
x	examine this group's devices and modes.
z	suspend this connection
?	display list of commands
^I	toggle tab expansion
^J	continue, ignore the escape sequence
^P	chat with the power controller
^R	replay the last line only
\.	disconnect
;	provide a new login or shift to a new console
+(-)	be more (less) free with newlines
.TE
.sp
.PP
If any other character is hit after the escape sequence, all three characters
will be discarded.
Note that serial line breaks, line down, and power controller commands
can only be sent from a full two-way attachment.
To send the escape sequence through the connection one must redefine
the outer escape sequence.
.PP
In the \fB\-u\fP output, the login \fB<none>\fP indicates no one is
viewing that console, the login \fB<spies>\fP indicates that
no one has a full two-way attachment.  When no one is attached to
a console its output is cloned to the stdout of the server process.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
console \-u
Outputs something like:
.sp
.RS
.TS
l18 l l.
dumb	up	<none>
expert	up	ksb@w01.dspd
tyro	up	<spies>
mentor	up	<none>
sage	up	fine@cis
.TE
.RE
.sp
The \fB<none>\fP indicates no one is viewing \fIdumb\fP or \fImentor\fP,
the \fB<spies>\fP indicates only read-only connections exist for \fItyro\fP,
other \fIlogin\fP@\fIhost\fP entries are the currently attached
\fIsage\fP and \fIexpert\fP.
.TP
console \-w
Outputs something like:
.sp
.RS
.TS
l l l.
ksb@extra	on expert	Fri Feb 15 16:40:36 1991
file@cis	on sage	Thu Feb 14  1:04:10 1991
dmr@alice	spy tyro	Thu Feb  7 10:09:59 1991
.TE
.RE
.sp
.TP
console \-e \*(lq^[1\*(rq lv426
Requests a connection to the host ``lv426'' with the escape characters
set to ``escape one''.

.SH BUGS
Connections suspended under Dynix sometimes break the kernel when
resumed.  Suspended connections are a poor idea in general, just
disconnect instead.
.PP
It is possible to create a loop of console connections, with ugly results.
Never run \fIconsole\fP from within a console connection.
In root's .profile set $CONSOLE with:
.sp 1
	 CONSOLE="-- hey 'do not run console from here'"
.sp 1
.PP
The \-\fBr\fP option doesn't really help to explain how connections get built.

.SH AUTHORS
Thomas A. Fine, Ohio State Computer Science.
.br
Kevin Braunsdorf, Federal Express (ksb@fedex.com)

.SH "SEE ALSO"
conserver.cf(5L), conserver(8L), autologin(8L)
