.\" $Id: msh.man,v 1.1 1997/01/28 04:35:34 kb207252 Exp $
.\" by Kevin Braunsdorf
.TH MSH 1L LOCAL
.SH NAME
msh \- the message shell
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ds PN "msh
\fI\*(PN\fP [\fIdefault\fP]
.br
\fI\*(PN\fP \-\fBh\fP
.br
\fI\*(PN\fP \-\fBV\fP
.br

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
When an login is going to be removed from the system (or moved to
another system) the message shell presents notification to anyone
accessing the system from the defunct account.
This is acomplished by setting the shell of the account to
the path to \fImsh\fP.
.PP
The message is recovered from a spool directory (/var/spool/msh)
by the login name or primary group name of the account.
The name that message shell is running as or a
pointer positional parameter \fIdefault\fP
(default value of "Default")
is opened as a last resort.
.PP
If no message can be located a pointer directing the customer to
the system administrator is displayed.

.SH OPTIONS
Since the message shell is usually run from \fBlogin\fP no command
line switches may be presented.
.TP
\fB\-h\fP
Print a brief help message.
.TP
\fB\-V\fP
Show version information.
.SH EXAMPLES
Build a file "toor" in the default message spool directory,
make a login "toor" in /etc/passwd with \fImsh\fP as its login shell
and login.
.SH BUGS
.PP
Uses \fBcat\fP to present the message to the user.  A shell-safe
pager would be a better option.
.PP
The three second sleep is handy for xterm as well as ISN users.

.SH AUTHOR
Kevin Braunsdorf
.br
DSPD UNIX Support
.br
ksb@fedex.com

.SH "SEE ALSO"
sh(1), login(8)
